protocol 1.7: outpoint subs (#2)
spesmilo/electrum-protocol: docs/protocol-methods.rst

  See :func:`blockchain.scriptpubkey.get_mempool` for how mempool
  transactions are returned.

  If the history of the scriptPubKey is too long (busy address, touched by thousands of txs),

>   and so the server refuses to serve it, it SHOULD send a JSON-RPC error with integer code `10_001`

Reviewer: For blockchain.transaction.broadcast_package we use the error code 1, maybe it would be useful to collect them in a table somewhere?

Also it might be safer to write 10001 instead of 10_001 to prevent implementers from trying to incorrectly send/parse the literal 10_001 string instead of the int.

Author: > For blockchain.transaction.broadcast_package we use the error code 1,

That's just the error code used in the example traffic.
ElectrumX uses `BAD_REQUEST = 1`, `DAEMON_ERROR = 2`, but even that is not used consistently, and it is specific to ElectrumX.

> maybe it would be useful to collect them in a table somewhere?

Yes, that would make sense, I agree. Except this is the first error code that we do specify, so maybe it is too early for that.

> Also it might be safer to write 10001 instead of 10_001 to prevent implementers from trying to incorrectly send/parse the literal 10_001 string instead of the int.

I think that syntax is used in multiple programming languages, so it should be understandable, but ok, I will change it anyway.

Author: > safer to write 10001 instead of 10_001

changed in https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/compare/acc7d161188c62efba6838748e26dcc17e8193b3..e8a379c369cec7ba1edb34951044243d9cfa5c79

  because the server can drop subscriptions in rare circumstances.

blockchain.outpoint.subscribe
=============================

Subscribe to a transaction outpoint (TXO), to get notifications about its status.
A status involves up to two transactions: the funding transaction that creates
the TXO (as one of its outputs), and the spending transaction that uses it
as an input (spends it).

**Signature**

  .. function:: blockchain.outpoint.subscribe(tx_hash, txout_idx, spk_hint)
  .. versionadded:: 1.7

  *tx_hash*

    The TXID of the funding transaction as a hexadecimal string.
    (sometimes called prevout_hash, in inputs)

  *txout_idx*

    The output index, a non-negative integer. (sometimes called prevout_n, in inputs)

  *spk_hint*

    The scriptPubKey (output script) corresponding to the outpoint (prevout), as a hexadecimal
    string. This helps the server find the outpoint. Behaviour is undefined if
    an incorrect value is provided.

    .. note::  Full index servers might not need the parameter in practice
      but some lighter personal servers (such as EPS, BWT, Floresta)
      would not be able to serve the request without it. A future protocol version might

>       add a feature flag where the server can signal whether it requires spk_hint.

Reviewer 2: I would remove that sentence (regarding future protocol version), it is not useful here, and it is not clear whether we want to do that.

Author: done in https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/commit/a3f65010dca693cb51b296455c94996eb74c636c

      Clients should always know the spk_hint in practice, so having to send it
      is not expected to kill any use case.

.. note::  The server MAY automatically clean up subscriptions (unsubscribe the client)
  where the spending transaction is already deeply mined at a reorg-safe height (typically
  100+ blocks deep).
  Similarly, the server MAY ignore new subscription requests if the spending tx is already
  mined at a reorg-safe height but it still MUST send at least one full response.

> **Result**

Reviewer 3: It might be useful if this (as well as similar APIs like `get_balance`, etc) would include a field with the current tip hash. When we make multiple subsequent requests it's otherwise always hard to tell whether the chain moved while we're at it.

Author: > similar APIs like get_balance, etc

I guess you have these methods in mind:

- `blockchain.scriptpubkey.get_balance`         - dict
    - I guess tip could make sense
    - though this method cannot be SPV-ed, so it is fully trusting the server. Not sure how widely it is used in the wild.
- `blockchain.scriptpubkey.get_history`         - list => cannot easily add tip
    - should be used with sub??
- `blockchain.scriptpubkey.get_mempool`         - list => cannot easily add tip
    - not sure how people use this method...?
- `blockchain.scriptpubkey.listunspent`         - list => cannot easily add tip
    - I guess tip could make sense
- `blockchain.outpoint.get_status`              - dict
    - I guess tip could make sense
- `blockchain.outpoint.subscribe`               - dict
    - if tip raced, client will just get a new notification
    - note btw current text says (so would have to be tweaked a bit):
        > "any event that changes any field of the `status` dictionary results in a notification"

For both of `bc.outpoint.get_status` and `bc.outpoint.subscribe`, if you then subsequently SPV the txids, that mostly solves the issue.

Though if you called `bc.outpoint.get_status` just when the tip also moved, and a relevant tx just moved from mempool to the new block, then you would not know you received stale data (still mentioning the mempool) - but indeed you would if we included the chaintip in the response.

In our use case, we use the subscriptions, and SPV the txid, so there is no ambiguity. What kind of client-usage pattern do you have in mind?

Reviewer 3: Well, eventually we may wan to switch to make use of subscriptions (and with outpoint subscriptions that could finally work out, we'll def. try once this is shipped and has sufficient support) but for now we mostly retrieve all data via polling (cf https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rust-lightning/blob/main/lightning-transaction-sync/src/electrum.rs). So having the tip hash available as relevant metadata for reorg detection would be great in general, especially for all methods that are not subscription based, e.g., `get_status` etc. IMO any HTTP based protocols should just include it as a reponse header, in Electrum it would probably mean adding it as an optional field ~everywhere if possible, though that could of course also happen over time.

Author: @LLFourn had similar remarks out-of-band yesterday.

Given that some of the RPCs return lists, while others return dicts, but adding the chaintip is problematic to lists,
and given that as part of the scripthash->spk change we are effectively adding new methods anyway,
I guess now is the time to "change" ~all the return types to dicts.

So, we could include the chaintip in the responses.

I wrote a spec for it now, though I have not written client/server code yet. The server might not be trivial to write, as it has to check for reorgs and retry, but it looks doable.

Please see if https://github.com/SomberNight/electrum-protocol/commit/9c32658b4629196f8ff7043c210beb0786bc0dd1 looks good.
I have not pushed that commit to this branch yet, given that ultimately it is you who knows what exactly you want, but if it looks good, I would push it here and maybe we could still include it in 1.7.

Reviewer 3: Ah, cool, thanks! Haven't reviewed the commit fully in close detail yet, but concept ACK! I'm not quite sure if the block hash compression is really necessary, but you are likely more knowledgeable regarding what data/indexes are already held in the implementations, so I'll refrain from opining on that. Agree 1.7 could  be the right time to make the change.

Author: I wrote [server-side](https://github.com/spesmilo/electrumx/pull/362) and [client-side](https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum/pull/10627) code for this, and it looks fine.
The client is of course trivial, the server-side was more interesting.

I have now pushed [that spec commit](https://github.com/SomberNight/electrum-protocol/commit/9c32658b4629196f8ff7043c210beb0786bc0dd1) to this branch.

Author: Could @romanz, @cculianu, or someone working on a server, comment if this seems reasonable to add into their server code?

-----

In general it is not trivial for a server to add.
To illustrate why, I will describe briefly how it looks like in ElectrumX:

The server is not monolithic. bitcoind and electrumx are two separate processes (not necessarily running on the same machine). e-x maintains its own mempool, so the mempool is essentially duplicated.

As far as e-x is concerned, bitcoind has "two" heights: daemon.height() calls a bitcoind RPC directly to ask for the current height, while daemon.cached_height() just internally returns the last height seen returned from daemon.height().
If e-x realises it's behind, it will fetch blocks and process those. Once they are processed in-memory, BlockProcessor.height is bumped. Then e-x flushes the db changes to the disk, after which db.height is bumped.
Meanwhile e-x's mempool logic is periodically polling bitcoind using getrawmempool, but only if daemon.height() == db.height.
Finally, after a new block, notifications are only sent to clients once a mempool polling tick finished, and then notified_height is bumped.

So there are ~5 different heights:
- `daemon.height()`
- `daemon.cached_height()`
- `block_processor.height`
- `db.height`
- `notified_height`

The propagation is in that order: daemon.height() -> daemon.cached_height() -> bp_height -> db_height -> notified_height

I am still thinking about potential designs re how to give this consistency guarantee to the client, but the following is what I have right now.

It's probably not practical to take a lock when any of thousands of clients calls a db query method to read or when the db is being updated. So what I implemented in e-x is a hack: when e.g. a get_history RPC is being handled, just before and just after the server can check the current height. When getting the height, it ensures:
`daemon.cached_height() == block_processor.height == db.height == notified_height`, and that's the value it uses.
If the height is the same when starting to process the request and when finishing it, then it will put that chaintip into the response and send it. Otherwise, it retries a few times. Specifically before retrying it sleeps until notified_height changes (with a timeout). If the retry attempts are exhausted, it sends a json-rpc-error to the client.

~~I believe it's mostly sufficient to compare heights and not full tip hashes, as a reorg between chains of the same length are highly unlikely (but I guess could happen). (maybe should compare tip hashes...)~~ (EDIT: comparing tip hashes now, and also comparing "reorg count")

On my mainnet server it takes 1-5 seconds to process a block (typically 2s). I saw one block that took 10 seconds to process. This is on fast modern hardware, limited by python single-core CPU usage and disk I/O.
While the BlockProcessor is processing a block, relevant RPC calls would be blocked.

Previously RPCs would be processed concurrently to all this, operating on the DB and e-x's mempool.
The DB would always be self-consistent and the mempool would always be self-consistent, but actually the mempool might be at an older height than the DB. (it could e.g. happen that a get_history result contains a just-mined tx twice: both in a block and in the mempool -- this is clearly a bug, though due to other internal implementation details it is even less likely to happen)

EDIT: realised it is ok if bitcoind is at a different height, just need to make sure e-x itself is in a consistent state (`block_processor.height == db.height == notified_height`). What can take several seconds is processing a block, but while that is being done, the server can just serve the old state from before the block. This limits the critical time window to <2 sec.

-----

If the protocol wants to add this consistency guarantee, that shifts the burden of figuring out state from the client to the server.  Clearly that's highly desirable to some clients, so the question is how practical it is for a server to implement.

Also, as a client, would you rather wait a few more seconds to get back a guaranteed-consistent response (in case a block is racing), or would you just want any response but fast? (EDIT: I believe I managed to make e-x fast enough so that the tradeoff is obviously worth it)

Author: @mononaut I see there is related discussion in https://github.com/mempool/mempool/issues/6584 but I don't have permissions to comment there. As we are considering adding the chain tip to json-rpc responses in the electrum protocol now (as seen in current PR changeset), it would be good to know if that is something some server implementations think they cannot reasonably support.

Author: > realised it is ok if bitcoind is at a different height, just need to make sure e-x itself is in a consistent state (`block_processor.height == db.height == notified_height`). What can take several seconds is processing a block, but while that is being done, the server can just serve the old state from before the block. This limits the critical time window to <2 sec.

(The critical window is the time window when if a protocol request comes in, serving it will be delayed until after the critical window ends.)

I have now made the mempool processing code in e-x faster, changed it to be event-based instead of polling, and made it run partially concurrent to the new-block-processing. Now the critical time window in e-x is <1 sec, typically around 0.4 sec, on a busy server.

This performance I believe is perfectly acceptable, and shows it is practical to tie back protocol responses to specific chaintips. (without rocksdb snapshots or similar, and while having a separate mempool state and chainstate)

Also, @romanz has confirmed out-of-band that adding the chaintip to protocol responses and ensuring the protocol response is consistent with said chaintip should not be too hard in electrs.

  The :ref:`status <status>` of the scriptPubKey.

  If the history of the scriptPubKey is too long (busy address, touched by thousands of txs),
  and so the server refuses to serve it, it SHOULD send a JSON-RPC error with integer code `10_001`

>   to communicate this to the client.

Reviewer 2: Edge case: if the history is not too long when you subscribe, but then it becomes too long. 
Should the server send a notification in that case?
Error codes in jsonrpc only exist in responses, not in notifications.

Author: >  Error codes in jsonrpc only exist in responses, not in notifications.

Right, I also looked this up exactly for this reason a couple days ago :D

Well the way ElectrumX has always worked in this case is that the server silently drops the subscription at that point. Not ideal but I would leave that as-is.

The protocol 2.0 history pagination and incremental recursive status would be the true fix.

Reviewer 2: We could return zeroes as the hash in the notification.
The client will request history if he receives a hash that does not match its own.

> The protocol 2.0 history pagination and incremental recursive status would be the true fix.

indeed

Author: > Well the way ElectrumX has always worked in this case is that the server silently drops the subscription at that point. Not ideal but I would leave that as-is.

I was wrong. ElectrumX drops the subscription but also sends back a notification with a null status (as if the scripthash did not have any history).
That should prompt the client to call get_history at which point they will get the JSON-RPC error.

I don't think this needs to be spec'd out.

**Signature**

  .. function:: blockchain.outpoint.subscribe(tx_hash, txout_idx, spk_hint)
  .. versionadded:: 1.7

  *tx_hash*

    The TXID of the funding transaction as a hexadecimal string.
    (sometimes called prevout_hash, in inputs)

  *txout_idx*

    The output index, a non-negative integer. (sometimes called prevout_n, in inputs)

  *spk_hint*

    The scriptPubKey (output script) corresponding to the outpoint (prevout), as a hexadecimal
    string. This helps the server find the outpoint. Behaviour is undefined if
    an incorrect value is provided.

    .. note::  Full index servers might not need the parameter in practice
      but some lighter personal servers (such as EPS, BWT, Floresta)
      would not be able to serve the request without it.
      Clients should always know the spk_hint in practice, so having to send it
      is not expected to kill any use case.

.. note::  The server MAY automatically clean up subscriptions (unsubscribe the client)
  where the spending transaction is already deeply mined at a reorg-safe height (typically
  100+ blocks deep).
  Similarly, the server MAY ignore new subscription requests if the spending tx is already

>   mined at a reorg-safe height but it still MUST send at least one full response.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  mined at a reorg-safe height but it still MUST include all details about the spending transaction in its response to the subscription request .
```

Author: How about:
```
  Similarly, the server MAY ignore new subscription requests if the spending tx is already
  mined at a reorg-safe height but it still MUST send the full response to the subscription request
  (just not the subsequent notifications - which likely would never trigger anyway without a deep reorg).
```

Reviewer 4: Yes this is fine.

Author: done in c87b393a2636570d59c75b26f2d7b8cbea921b1e

  only the scripthash (which is fixed size). Also, this limits upstream bandwidth usage
  of servers.
  The signature is

    .. function:: blockchain.scriptpubkey.subscribe(scripthash, status)
       :noindex:

blockchain.scriptpubkey.unsubscribe
===================================

Unsubscribe from a scriptPubKey, preventing future notifications if its :ref:`status
<status>` changes.

**Signature**

  .. function:: blockchain.scriptpubkey.unsubscribe(scriptpubkey)
  .. versionadded:: 1.6

  *scriptpubkey*

    The scriptPubKey as a hexadecimal string.

**Result**

  Returns :const:`True` if the scriptpubkey was subscribed to, otherwise :const:`False`.
  Note that :const:`False` might be returned even for something subscribed to earlier,
  because the server can drop subscriptions in rare circumstances.

blockchain.outpoint.subscribe
=============================

Subscribe to a transaction outpoint (TXO), to get notifications about its status.
A status involves up to two transactions: the funding transaction that creates
the TXO (as one of its outputs), and the spending transaction that uses it
as an input (spends it).

**Signature**

>   .. function:: blockchain.outpoint.subscribe(tx_hash, txout_idx, spk_hint=None)

Author: note: bitcoin core added a `txospenderindex`, to be used with the `gettxspendingprevout` RPC.
ref https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24539

- see what their API looks like and maybe adapt what we add to that
  - in particular we could put `spender_blockhash` in the response
  - they also have an option to put the full tx in the response

Author: note: electrumx server impl was changed to use `txospenderindex` instead of a custom re-implementation of essentially the same.
Re the protocol API, we did not change it.

  "258: txn-mempool-conflict"

blockchain.transaction.broadcast_package

> ========================================

Author: note: this is from https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/pull/1

Reviewer: I made some changes in this commit https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/pull/1/commits/7bc5f11efc6f0b39a2958ea2ccac63aa763fe1f6 that add an additional, optional errors field to the non-verbose message, replace the package_msg with a success: bool and make the replaced txids field optional too.

Author: changes incorporated

Author: needs updates from https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/pull/1 again

Author: done again

subscriptions. We simply abuse the JSON-RPC "Notification" mechanism to allow
sending an "unrequested" message that does not warrant a response.
Both the client and the server MUST tolerate receiving this as an unrequested notification.

  **Note** The client can send this method either as "Request" or as "Notification".
  The server is only allowed to send it as "Notification".
  There seems to be no useful traffic pattern that could be mimicked by allowing the server to send
  this as a request (and getting the client to respond). If one arises, we could
  relax this in a future version.
  Allowing the client to send it as "Notification" can be useful as an alternative way
  to pad its outgoing traffic, in case it does not have direct access to the lower-level
  JSON-RPC stream to inject whitespaces.

**Signature**

  .. function:: server.ping(pong_len=0, data="")
  .. versionadded:: 1.2
  .. versionchanged:: 1.7
     both parties are now allowed to send this
     and significant changes to signature/fields

  * *pong_len*

    The number of hex characters the other party should send in the *data* part of the response.
    A non-negative integer.

  * *data*

>     A hexadecimal string (but can be odd-length). Its value is to be ignored by the recipient.

Reviewer: Maybe `A string of hexadecimal characters of arbitrary length (including odd lengths).` makes more clear that this string doesn't have to be a valid hex encoded bytes?

Author: Hmm. For the response the length is not arbitrary, so that phrasing is not perfect either.
There are both odd-length and even-length examples a few lines below. I think it's fine as-is.

    there is no pruning limit.  Should be the same as what would
    suffix the letter ``p`` in the IRC real name.

  * *method_flavours*

    A dictionary that describes whether optional features of certain protocol methods
    are supported by the server. The server might also require an otherwise optional
    argument to be set by the client, that too should be clearly advertised here.
    The keys are protocol method name strings, and the values are dictionaries
    that are specific to the given protocol method.

    If a server supports all functionality defined for the negotiated protocol version,
    it can just set this to the empty dict (but the `method_flavours` key itself
    must always be present).

> 

Reviewer 2: I think `method_flavours` should be postponed for now, because its role is not clear.
it seems that what it wants to achieve collides with the features negotiation proposal in #7

Author: OTOH it would be good if the server could clearly signal whether it requires `spk_hint` for `blockchain.outpoint.subscribe`.

`method_flavours["blockchain.outpoint.subscribe"]["requires_spk_hint"]=true` was the motivating use case for `method_flavours`. (see e.g. https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/commit/4b4dcdacc2c4d703d42b72505e0fae9d6f29eb1a)

Or do we accept that there is no way for a client to know whether the server requires spk_hint, for now?

Author: We could make `spk_hint` a mandatory field for now, and perhaps make it optional in a future version with proper feature flags. In all reasonable scenarios, the client should know the corresponding spk.

Author: > We could make `spk_hint` a mandatory field for now

done in https://github.com/spesmilo/electrum-protocol/commit/4460b8564ea29e49136f05618e7ee075f738a142
